# CSCI 2254 Web App Development

### Spring 2017

**R. Muller**

------

### Lecture Notes: 2

#### Today

1. git & GitHub
2. HTML
3. colors

------

####1. git and GitHub####

Developers use a variety of software tooling systems to help them coordinate the development of the systems that they're developing. One of the most important of these tools is the *version control* system which helps manage design and development. Version control systems have been rattling around for many years. In the internet era, version control tend to be *distributed* — they help coordinate work between developers from around the world. One of the most popular of these is the [git](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git) system which was introduced by the developers of Linux.

The `git` system is built around the idea of a [repository](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_repository) — an archive of a software project. You're invited to forage around to learn about git. In 2009, a company, [GitHub](https://github.com/), was formed as a wrap-around of git. Since then it has become a wildly popular hub of the software industry — especially the open source community.

GitHub has developed support for education and we'll be using that support to support our course. In particular, we'll use it to

1. distrubute problem sets and supporting code,
2. collect problem set solutions,
3. distribute class lecture notes and code.

In order to participate, you'll have to create a GitHub account. Once you've done that, send your GitHub ID to a course staffer and we'll invite you to join the course group @BC-CSCI2254.  Once you've joined this group, you'll be able to download (clone) problem set and course materials.

#### 2. HTML####

As you no doubt know, the internet was developed in the early 1970s and the world-wide web was introduced in the early 1990s. The internet hosts a number of languages and protocols with [TCP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol) and [IP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Protocol) at the core. The www is built on top of one of those protocols: the [HyperText Transfer Protoocol (HTTP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol) — in particular, it is embodied in a language for marking up electronic documents: the [HyperText Markup Language (HTML)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML). HTML has evolved over the years but it remains at the core of web app technology. An HTML document consists of various "tagged elements", primarily text. 

An HTML element has an opening tag, some content and then the closing form of the opening tag:

```html
<TAG> content </TAG>
```

Note that the closing tag starts with a slash.

The set of HTML tags is fixed — you can look them up. They include:

```html
html, head, body, div, span, p, ol, li, pre, ...
```

##### Attributes#####

Opening tags are sometimes accompanied by additional information in the form of **attributes**.

```html
<TAG attribute = attribute-value> content </TAG>
```

For example, one could write:

```html
<div class = "myclass"> ... </div>
```

Here the attribute is `class` with an attribute value being the string `"myclass"`. 

Some attributes are specific for a given tag while others (such as `class` above) can be used in conjunction with any tag. An example of this is the `style` attribute which gives access to document styling information:

```html
<div style = "background:blue; color:white"> ... </div>
```

The styling information specifies, well, the "style" of the rendered element. We'll have a good deal more to say about this styling when we discuss CSS in the coming meetings. For now, it suffices to say that styles are specified as `property`/`property-value` associations. In the example above, the property `background` is associated with the property-value `blue` and the property `color` (i.e., the font color) is associated with the property value `white`. 

We'll have more to say about styling as we move ahead.

#### 3. Colors#### 

Web browsers have a large number of built-in named colors, take a look at the [MDN Colors](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color_value). If you don't want to use a named color, you're welcome to make one up using an integer `#RRGGBB` where `RR` specifies the amount of red, `GG` specifies the amount of green and `BB` specifies the amount of blue. These quantities are specified as two-digit hexadecimal numerals: numerals in the range: 00 to FF (in base 10, 00 to 255). Note that

1. `#FFFFFF` — all of R, G and B are maxed-out, we have the color white;
2. `#000000` — all of R, G and B are absent, we have the color black;
3. when `RR` = `GG` = `BB`, all are the same, we have a shade of gray.