# CSCI 2254 Web App Development#

### Spring 2017###

**R. Muller**

---

###Lecture Notes: March 27, 2017###

####Today : Node & Express & Command Shells####

1. Command Shells & Node.js
2. Express 

---

### 1. Command Shells, Node.js, Express.js and using cslab1.bc.edu###

Node.js is widely used for managing web servers and for working with JS on the front end. In order to use Node.js, you'll need to use a command shell. 

#### OS X

If you have a Mac, the easiest way to use a command shell is to use the Terminal app in the Applications/Utilities folder.

#### Windows

If you're using a Windows machine, your choices depend on which version of Windows you have. Two shells that are commonly used are [git for windows](https://git-for-windows.github.io/) and [Power Shell](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/setup/installing-windows-powershell).

Going forward, we'll assume that you've installed a shell and that you've learned how to use it.

#### Node.js

You can download Node.js from [here](https://nodejs.org/en/). Once you've installed it, you should be able to run it from the shell.

```bash
> node -v
v6.10.0
> npm -v
3.10.10
```

#### Installing Express.js & nodemon

```bash
> sudo npm install -g express-generator  # express generator makes express available in the shell
> sudo npm install -g nodemon            # nodemon restarts your server automatically during dev
```

#### Using Express

You can run the `express` command to build boiler-plate for a web app.

```bash
> express myapp --view=hogan                # hogan.js is an HTML template system from Twitter.
> cd myapp
myapp\> ls
app.js          package.json    routes/
bin/            public/         views/
```

The `—view=hogan` switch above tells express to install the [Hogan](http://twitter.github.io/hogan.js/) templating language developed by Twitter. The `package.json` file acts as a configuration file for your app. 

#### Git

In order to synchronize your work with your partner, and to simplify both grading and deploying your web app, use git. In particular, create a git repo:

```bash
myapp\> git init
```

Create a `.gitignore` file so that git doesn't archive your huge `node_modules` file. Your `.gitignore` file should be housed in the root directory and contain the text:

```bash
.gitignore
node_modules
```

Once this file is created, git will ignore the `node_modules`subfolder. This folder can be ignored because all of the resources required to develop and deploy the app are listed in the `package.json` config file. These resources can be installed using the `npm install` command as shown below. 

Finishing up the git commands:

```bash
myapp\> git add *
myapp\> git commit -m "initial"
```

To share your work with your partner, create a shared repo on GitHub and `git push` the contents of your app to the shared repo.

#### Developing Your WebApp on your System

```bash
myapp\> npm install
...
myapp\> ls
app.js          node_modules/   public/         views/
bin/            package.json    routes/
```

Once installed, you can run this bare express app using `nodemon`.

```bash
> nodemon
```

For development, you can use your own laptop as your web server. Fire up a browser and visit `localhost:3000`. 

#### Using cslab1.bc.edu as a Web Server

Once your app is working, you can deploy it to your account on cslab1.bc.edu. Make sure that the most recent version has been pushed to GitHub. Then ssh to cslab1.bc.edu. Your username on cslab1.bc.edu is your BC username and your password is your eagle ID #.

```bash
> ssh cslab1.bc.edu
...
> git clone URL_OF_YOUR_REPO
> cd myapp
> npm install
...
> export PORT=8100
> nodemon
```

Now fire up your browser on your laptop and visit the url

```bash
cslab1.bc.edu:8100
```

Your app should be running.